docs: #1561 Tiered Storage fine grained caching (#1596)
redpanda-data/documentation: modules/manage/pages/cluster-maintenance/manage-throughput.adoc

= Manage Throughput
:description: Configure broker-wide and client-specific throughput quotas to prevent resource exhaustion and enable multi-tenant isolation.
:page-categories: Management, Networking
:page-topic-type: how-to
:personas: platform_admin, developer

> :learning-objective-1: Configure user-based throughput quotas with authentication

Reviewer: This doesn't read well.  I'd get rid of "with authentication" here. That's a noisy detail. They're user-based throughput quotas, period.

Reviewer 2: Removed "with authentication"

> :learning-objective-2: Set client-based quotas for backward compatibility

Reviewer: Get rid of 'for backwards compatibility'. No. this is still supported and a different functionally than the other quotas and can be used in combination. It;'s not for backwards compatibility

Reviewer 2: Removed "for backward compatibility"

* [ ] {learning-objective-3}

You can configure limits at two levels:

* Broker limits: These apply to all clients connected to the broker and restrict total traffic on the broker. See <<Broker-wide throughput limits>>.
ifndef::env-cloud[]
* Client limits: These apply to authenticated users or clients defined by their `client_id`. You can manage client quotas with xref:reference:rpk/rpk-cluster/rpk-cluster-quotas.adoc[`rpk cluster quotas`], with {ui}, or with the Kafka API. When no quotas apply, the client has unlimited throughput.
endif::[]
ifdef::env-cloud[]
* Client limits: These apply to authenticated users or clients defined by their `client_id`. You can manage client quotas with xref:reference:rpk/rpk-cluster/rpk-cluster-quotas.adoc[`rpk cluster quotas`], with the {ui} UI, with the link:https://docs.redpanda.com/api/doc/cloud-dataplane/operation/operation-quotaservice_listquotas[Redpanda Cloud Data Plane API], or with the Kafka API. When no quotas apply, the client has unlimited throughput.

NOTE: Throughput throttling is supported for BYOC and Dedicated clusters only.
endif::[]

== About throughput quotas

Redpanda supports two types of throughput quotas:

> * Client-based quotas: Limit throughput based on the self-declared `client_id` field. No authentication required.

Reviewer: Get rid of "no authentication required" here. This is superfluous

Reviewer 2: Removed

====

To set broker-wide throughput limits, use xref:reference:rpk/rpk-cluster/rpk-cluster-config-set.adoc[`rpk cluster config set`] to configure the cluster properties:

[,bash]
----
# Set ingress limit to 100 MB/s per broker
rpk cluster config set kafka_throughput_limit_node_in_bps 100000000

# Set egress limit to 200 MB/s per broker
rpk cluster config set kafka_throughput_limit_node_out_bps 200000000
----
endif::[]

== Client throughput limits

Redpanda provides configurable throughput quotas for individual clients or authenticated users. Quotas are managed through the Kafka-compatible AlterClientQuotas and DescribeClientQuotas APIs, accessible with `rpk`, Redpanda Console, or Kafka client libraries.

=== Set user-based quotas

IMPORTANT: User-based quotas require authentication to be enabled. To set up authentication, see xref:{authentication-doc}[].

==== Quota for a specific user

To limit throughput for a specific authenticated user across all clients:

[,bash]
----
rpk cluster quotas alter --add producer_byte_rate=2000000 --name user=alice
----

> This limits user `alice` to 2 MB/s for produce requests, regardless of which `client_id` they use.

Reviewer 3: singular user, but plural pronoun. I see you are consistent with this, but not sure why.

Reviewer 2: Updated

To view quotas for a user:

[,bash]
----
rpk cluster quotas describe --name user=alice
----

Expected output:

[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
user=alice
	producer_byte_rate=2000000
----

==== Default quota for all users

To set a fallback quota for any user without a more specific quota:

[,bash]
----

> rpk cluster quotas alter --add consumer_byte_rate=5000000 --default user

Reviewer: Does this not require quotes or anything. Is '--default user' the correct syntax for this switch? @pgellert ?

Reviewer 4: Yes, this syntax is correct, no extra quotes required.

----

This applies a 5 MB/s fetch quota to all authenticated users who don't have a more specific quota configured.

==== Remove a user quota

To remove a quota for a specific user:

[,bash]
----
rpk cluster quotas alter --delete consumer_byte_rate --name user=alice
----

To remove all quotas for a user:

[,bash]
----
rpk cluster quotas delete --name user=alice
----

=== Set combined user and client quotas

You can set quotas for specific (user, client_id) combinations for fine-grained control.

==== User with specific client

To limit a specific user when using a specific client:

[,bash]
----
rpk cluster quotas alter --add consumer_byte_rate=1000000 --name user=alice --name client-id=consumer-1
----

> User `alice` using `client_id="consumer-1"` is limited to 1 MB/s. The same user with a different `client_id` would use a different quota (or fall back to less specific matches).

Reviewer: "1MB/s fetch rate"

Reviewer 2: Added fetch rate

> User `alice` using `client_id="consumer-1"` is limited to a 1 MB/s fetch rate. The same user with a different `client_id` would use a different quota (or fall back to less specific matches).

Reviewer 3: What is the significance of the double quotation marks here? Seems superfluous.

Reviewer 2: Removed

To view combined quotas:

[,bash]
----
rpk cluster quotas describe --name user=alice --name client-id=consumer-1
----

==== User with client prefix

To set a shared quota for a user across multiple clients matching a prefix:

[,bash]
----

> rpk cluster quotas alter --add producer_byte_rate=3000000 --name user=bob --name client-id-prefix=producer-

Reviewer: Maybe user a different prefix than 'producer' since it might be confusing. the prefix could be something like app1- or something

Reviewer 2: Updated to use `app1`

----

> All clients used by user `bob` with `client_id` starting with "app1-" share a combined 3 MB/s quota.

Reviewer 3: why not `app1-`?

Reviewer 3: Sometimes you use the delimiters, sometime the double quotation marks, sometimes both. Not going to mark every instance. Just be consistent, whatever you decide.

Reviewer 2: Updated to use backticks

rpk cluster quotas alter --add consumer_byte_rate=200000 --name client-id-prefix=consumer-
----

> NOTE: A client group specified with `client-id-prefix` is not the equivalent of a Kafka consumer group. It is used only to match requests based on the `client_id` prefix.

Reviewer 4: I think this could be useful extra context:
```suggestion
NOTE: A `client-id-prefix` quota group is not related to Kafka consumer groups. The `client_id` is an application-defined identifier sent with every request—client libraries typically default to their own name (such as kgo, rdkafka, sarama, or perf-producer-client), but applications can set it via the (https://kafka.apache.org/41/configuration/consumer-configs/#consumerconfigs_client.id)[`client.id`] configuration property. This makes prefix-based quotas useful for grouping related applications (for example, inventory-service- to match inventory-service-1, inventory-service-2, etc.).
```

=== View throughput limits in {ui}

You can also use {ui} to view enforced limits. In the side menu, go to **Quotas**.

=== Monitor client throughput

The following metrics provide insights into client throughput quota usage:

* Client quota throughput per rule and quota type:
** `/public_metrics` - xref:reference:public-metrics-reference.adoc#redpanda_kafka_quotas_client_quota_throughput[`redpanda_kafka_quotas_client_quota_throughput`]
ifndef::env-cloud[]
** `/metrics` - xref:reference:internal-metrics-reference.adoc#vectorized_kafka_quotas_client_quota_throughput[`vectorized_kafka_quotas_client_quota_throughput`]
endif::[]
* Client quota throttling delay per rule and quota type, in seconds:
** `/public_metrics` - xref:reference:public-metrics-reference.adoc#redpanda_kafka_quotas_client_quota_throttle_time[`redpanda_kafka_quotas_client_quota_throttle_time`]
ifndef::env-cloud[]
** `/metrics` - xref:reference:internal-metrics-reference.adoc#vectorized_kafka_quotas_client_quota_throttle_time[`vectorized_kafka_quotas_client_quota_throttle_time`]
endif::[]

To identify which clients are actively connected and generating traffic, see <<view-connected-client-details>>.

> // TODO: Verify the exact quota_rule label values for user-based quotas in v26.1.

Reviewer 2: @pgellert Would you mind confirming that the label values are as described here?

Reviewer 4: Yeah, good point, they do change. These are the set of values that are possible (a bunch of new rule values added, and the old `cluster_` ones don't exist anymore): https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda/blob/a8aa17c80aaa60d6c4ac55e43c50eaf7da43372c/src/v/kafka/server/client_quota_translator.cc#L111-L133

Reviewer 2: @pgellert according to our metrics docs generation tool + Claude Code, the label name also changed (`redpanda_quota_rule`, alongside `redpanda_quota_type`), I went ahead and added that in this doc but if you could please also double check, that would be helpful.

Reviewer 4: Thanks, the label names are indeed `redpanda_quota_type` and `redpanda_quota_type`. They have always been that, though, so that was a typo from earlier, rather than a change in 26.1.

Quota metrics use the `quota_rule` label to identify which quota was applied to a request. The label distinguishes between different entity types (user, client, or combinations). See the `quota_rule` label values in xref:reference:public-metrics-reference.adoc#redpanda_kafka_quotas_client_quota_throughput[].

> The `kafka_quotas` logger provides details at the trace level on client quota throttling:

Reviewer: These logs are not available to cloud users

Reviewer 2: Added directives so this content does not display in Cloud docs

TRACE 2024-06-14 15:37:59,195 [shard  2:main] kafka_quotas - connection_context.cc:605 - [127.0.0.1:58636] throttle request:{snc:0, client:184}, enforce:{snc:-14359, client:-14359}, key:0, request_size:1316
----

[[migrate]]
=== Migrate cluster configuration quotas to Kafka API-based quotas

Prior to v24.2, quotas were configured through cluster configuration properties. These properties were deprecated in v24.2 in favor of the Kafka API-based approach. This section shows how to migrate from cluster configuration-based quotas to Kafka API-based quotas.

. Use xref:reference:rpk/rpk-cluster/rpk-cluster-config-get.adoc[`rpk cluster config get`] to view current client quotas managed with cluster configuration. The following example shows how to retrieve the `kafka_client_group_byte_rate_quota` for two groups of producers:
+
[,bash]
----
rpk cluster config get kafka_client_group_byte_rate_quota
----
+
[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
"kafka_client_group_byte_rate_quota": [
  {
    "group_name": "group_1",

>     "clients_prefix": "producer_group_alone_producer",

Reviewer: 'lone producer'?

Reviewer 2: Migrate section has been removed

[[migrate]]
=== Migrate cluster configuration quotas to Kafka API-based quotas

> Prior to v24.2, quotas were configured through cluster configuration properties. These properties were deprecated in v24.2 in favor of the Kafka API-based approach. This section shows how to migrate from cluster configuration-based quotas to Kafka API-based quotas.

Reviewer 4: Do we have any rules on how long to keep docs about old versions? This one might be ready for cleanup.

If we keep it, it might be worth putting it at the bottom, as the console + monitoring sections are more useful for most readers

Reviewer 2: I've moved it all the way to the end: https://deploy-preview-1596--redpanda-docs-preview.netlify.app/current/manage/cluster-maintenance/manage-throughput/#migrate @mattschumpert Could you please advise on whether we should remove this section altogether for 26.1?

Reviewer: We can remove this its so old

Reviewer 2: Removed

** `/metrics` - xref:reference:internal-metrics-reference.adoc#vectorized_kafka_quotas_client_quota_throttle_time[`vectorized_kafka_quotas_client_quota_throttle_time`]
endif::[]

To identify which clients are actively connected and generating traffic, see <<view-connected-client-details>>.

> Quota metrics use the `redpanda_quota_rule` label to identify which quota was applied to a request. The label distinguishes between different entity types (user, client, or combinations). See the label values in xref:reference:public-metrics-reference.adoc#redpanda-kafka-quotas-client-quota-throughput[].

Reviewer 3: link is not rendering
CC knows why!
The anchor exists but uses underscores, not hyphens. The xref uses redpanda-kafka-quotas-client-quota-throughput but the actual section heading is redpanda_kafka_quotas_client_quota_throughput.                                            
                                                                                                                              
Antora auto-generates anchors from section headings by replacing spaces with hyphens — but here the heading itself contains underscores (it's a metric name), so the anchor is also underscores.                                                        
                                                                                                                              
The fix is to change the xref to match:

  xref:reference:public-metrics-reference.adoc#redpanda_kafka_quotas_client_quota_throughput[]

Reviewer 2: Updated to add link text and use underscores

** `/metrics` - xref:reference:internal-metrics-reference.adoc#vectorized_kafka_quotas_client_quota_throttle_time[`vectorized_kafka_quotas_client_quota_throttle_time`]

> endif::[]

Reviewer 4: I think it could be worth adding a link from somewhere in the `monitor client throughput` section up to the `View connected client details` section at the top of this page.

Reviewer 2: Added
